
 * The authors of this software are Rob Pike and Howard Trickey.
 *		Copyright (c) 1998 by Lucent Technologies.
 *
 * Rob King made some changes.
 *		Those changes, Copyright (c) 2014-2015 by Rob King.
 *
 * Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
 * purpose without fee is hereby granted, provided that this entire notice
 * is included in all copies of any software which is or includes a copy
 * or modification of this software and in all copies of the supporting
 * documentation for such software.
 * THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
 * WARRANTY.  IN PARTICULAR, NEITHER THE AUTHORS NOR LUCENT TECHNOLOGIES MAKE ANY
 * REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE MERCHANTABILITY
 * OF THIS SOFTWARE OR ITS FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

This is an X11 version of Rob Pike's editor, sam.  Documentation describing
its use and construction are provided in subdirectory doc.  The file
doc/sam.1 contains the manual page; doc/sam.1.pdf is a PDF version of that
page. doc/sam.tut.ms is a tutorial that can be formatted with troff -ms.
It substitutes Bold and Italics for the fonts named CW and CS; if your system
has these fonts, remove the CW and CS macros at the beginning of the file. The
files doc/sam.ps and doc/se.ps are postscript versions of published papers
describing sam and structural regular expressions.  These papers reflect
sam's capabilities at the time of publication several years ago; while the
general description remains accurate, some functions may have changed or been
removed. The file doc/keyboard is an example of a Unicode input configuration
file; it serves as a good starting point for a customized version (see the
manual page for more information).

Sam is composed of three programs: sam itself, which does the command
processing and file manipulation; and samterm, which controls the display
and interacts with the user.  You can run sam on one machine and samterm on
another connected via remote execution. A third program, rsam, is automatically
interpolated between the terminal and the remote instance of sam by default
to allow an additional control channel on the remote machine.

This version of sam is based on the Plan 9 implementation.  Its
design and expression reflect the functionality of the Plan 9 environment;
most notably, characters are represented internally by 16-bit values called
Runes.  Header files include/u.h and include/libc.h and source files
libframe/misc.c, libXg/rune.c, sam/unix.c and samterm/unix.c contain
code that insinuates sam into the Unix world.  Two other files,
sam/plan9.c and samterm/plan9.c, contain Plan 9-specific code; they
are not used in the Unix version of sam and are provided as examples
of the Plan 9 interface.

The typedefs for uchar, ushort, and ulong defined in include/u.h, may conflict
with exisiting definitions in include file <sys/types.h> on some systems.
If this occurs, remove the offending definitions from include/u.h.

The distribution consists of several directories:

	sam - The source for sam.  It loads against libXg to pick
		up some utility routines.

	samterm - The source for samterm.  It loads against libframe,
		libXg, and your local X11 libraries.

	rsam - The source for rsam.

	libframe - The source for the frame library.  This library is used
		by samterm so it must be made first.
	
	libXg - The source code of the graphics library and some general
		utility modules.  Header file u.h provides much of the
		interface between sam and the local environment.  It is
		included in every source file.  Sam's graphics
		operations are implemented by Plan 9 libg functions.  This
		library emulates those functions using X11 operations.

	include - header files.

	doc - The documentation for sam.

Each source directory contains a makefile.
The master makefile in the top directory builds the subdirectories in
proper order.

Most customization effort is confined to configuring the makefiles.
They are configured by editing config.mk; see that file for details.

After configuring the makefiles, change to the top-level directory and
type "make". Typing "make install" installs B, sam, samterm and samsave in
their permanent homes as well as their on-line documentation.

During testing, the path of samterm may be specified using the -t command line
option to sam.  Similarly, the path of sam itself may be specified using the
-s command line option; this is handy for testing the remote execution feature.

The script doc/B is a Bourne shell-compatible script that sends a 'B' command
to a running instance of sam.

The original protocol between sam and samterm assumed that memory addresses
and longs were 32 bits.  Dave Hanson removed this dependency from the
protocol allowing sam to run on 64-bit processors.  However, other
dependencies on structure alignment remain. The USE64BITS configuration
variable in config.mk can be set to cope with 64-bit systems.

Rob Pike designed and implemented the original Unix version of sam and
the current version ported from Plan 9.  Howard Trickey provided the X
version of the graphics library, libXg.  Matty Farrow and his colleagues
at the University of Sydney extended libXg to support Runes.  Boyd Roberts
supplied the external command interface and the shell scripts for the 'B'
command. Doug Gwyn contributed many useful ideas to the X implementation
of sam. James Clark provided the simulations of the V10 Unix Man macros at
the beginning of the original manual pages. Rob King updated sam to support
little-endian 64-bit architectures, scalable fonts, dynamic composition
configuration, two-button-mice, Linux, and more keyboard shortcuts.


Please send bug fixes and comments to:

Rob King, jking@deadpixi.com
http://www.deadpixi.com/an-updated-version-of-sam
